Mind the gaps: The fraught road to quantum advantage
Jens Eisert1, 2, 3 and John Preskill4, 5
1

arXiv:2510.19928v1 [quant-ph] 22 Oct 2025

Dahlem Center for Complex Quantum Systems, Freie Universität Berlin, 14195 Berlin, Germany
2
Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie, 14109 Berlin, Germany
3
Fraunhofer Heinrich Hertz Institute, 10587 Berlin, Germany
4
Institute for Quantum Information and Matter, California Institute of Technology, CA 91125, USA
5
AWS Center for Quantum Computing, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
Quantum computing is advancing rapidly, yet substantial gaps separate today’s noisy intermediate-scale
quantum (NISQ) devices from tomorrow’s fault-tolerant application-scale (FASQ) machines. We identify four
related hurdles along the road ahead: (i) from error mitigation to active error detection and correction, (ii) from
rudimentary error correction to scalable fault tolerance, (iii) from early heuristics to mature, verifiable algorithms,
and (iv) from exploratory simulators to credible advantage in quantum simulation. Targeting these transitions
will accelerate progress toward broadly useful quantum computing.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Quantum computers harness principles of quantum physics
to solve some problems dramatically faster than conventional
computers. The potential power of quantum computing was
recognized in the 1980s [1–3], and interest in the topic skyrocketed in the 1990s when algorithms were discovered that,
in principle, would allow quantum computers to break cryptosystems that are widely used to protect the privacy of digital
communication [4].
These developments stirred experimental physicists to pursue quantum computing hardware, but for several decades
experiment lagged far behind theory. This is now changing.
So-called noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) computers now exist of sufficient size and accuracy that some tasks
performed by the quantum machine are too complex to be
emulated by the most powerful available conventional supercomputers [5, 6]. NISQ technology is an impressive feat of
engineering and opens exciting opportunities to explore quantum physics in previously inaccessible regimes. But quantum
computations that are practically useful and economically viable have not yet been achieved, nor is it clear when that might
happen.
Quantum hardware platforms are advancing steadily, but no
one knows when quantum computers will run applications
that broadly benefit society.
The promise of quantum computing has attracted enthusiastic attention from companies, investors, and governments,
as well as scientists, fueling the progress of NISQ technology.
But NISQ computers are not error corrected, and the relatively
high gate error rates of today’s NISQ devices severely limit
their computational power; therefore, few practical uses of this
technology have emerged to date. It has long been known how
to overcome this limitation [7, 8]. NISQ technology will be
superseded by fault-tolerant application scale (FASQ) computers that exploit quantum error-correcting codes to run a wide
variety of useful applications. Quantum hardware has reached
a sufficiently advanced stage that the voyage from NISQ to
FASQ is gathering momentum in companies and research laboratories. We can envision fault-tolerant quantum computers

with logical gate error rates that are many orders of magnitude
better than the underlying physical gate error rates of hardware platforms. But this transition, still nascent, will unfold
gradually on a timescale that remains highly uncertain.
The path from NISQ to FASQ is likely to be arduous, expensive, and prolonged.
The divide between NISQ and FASQ is a particularly daunting gap that must be bridged to realize the full potential of
quantum computing. In this perspective article, we highlight
this and several other gaps that require the attention of the
quantum community. Recognizing these gaps, and how to
cross them, clarifies the challenges we face and the roadmap
for gradual future progress.
It is helpful, for example, to divide the quest for FASQ
into two stages. In the first stage (see Sec. II), we will cross
the gap from today’s error mitigation methods that enhance
the power of NISQ computers to error-corrected devices that
protect quantum information much longer than the inherent
lifetime of the underlying physical qubits. The second stage
(see Sec. III) will build on these extended quantum memory
times to realize universal fault-tolerant quantum computers
that can solve hard problems. The first milestone will soon be
within reach; the second will take longer. In fact, future quantum processors with broad utility may be based on different
hardware modalities and/or architectural principles than those
that are now being avidly pursued.
A proposed application of quantum computing should satisfy three criteria. First, we desire an algorithm that runs
efficiently on a quantum machine with quantifiable and reachable resource requirements. Second, we want a persuasive
argument, possibly based on unproven but reasonable assumptions, indicating that any conceivable classical algorithm that
achieves the same task has a much longer runtime than the
quantum algorithm. And third, the quantum algorithm should
provide a useful answer to a question that someone cares about.
This answer might fuel scientific progress, or might provide
economic value for companies, or might broadly benefit humanity. Whoever benefits, the answer should have intrinsic
value, whether or not it was produced by a quantum machine.

2
We seek applications that are quantumly easy, classically
hard, and practically useful.
The quantum community has proposed a few concrete ideas
about where to find quantum utility, but substantial gaps in
our knowledge must be addressed to make a compelling case
that quantum computing will have significant practical value.
One hope is that quantum machines will speed up the search
for solutions to optimization problems and enhance the efficacy of machine learning (see Sec. IV). But there is large gap
between such aspirations and what has so far been rigorously
established.
Another proposal is that simulations using quantum computers will unveil static and dynamical properties of many-particle
quantum systems in a regime beyond the reach of classical machines or previous quantum experiments. This aim may already
be realized in the NISQ or early fault-tolerant eras (see Sec. V).
But for a while the results of such simulations will be most
valued by scientists rather than for-profit industries. Eventually,
quantum simulations may guide the discovery of new chemical
compounds and exotic materials with significant societal value,
but by some current estimates such applications have quantum
resource requirements that might not be attainable soon. Our
expectation is that scientific exploration enabled by near-term
quantum computers will form the foundation for a variety of
unforeseen applications in the longer term, just as happened in
the case of conventional computing.
Early applications of quantum computing will be primarily
scientific. Broader economic impact will eventually follow.
Quantum utility will unfold gradually, fueled by advances
in both technology and theory. Today’s most capable NISQ
machines can execute computations with fewer than 104 twoqubit quantum operations. By some estimates, a broadly useful
FASQ machine will need to be able to execute about 1012
such operations (a teraquop) or more [9, 10]. As gate error
rates improve and physical qubit counts increase, fault-tolerant
quantum computing will pass through the megaquop regime
(∼ 106 operations) and the gigaquop regime (∼ 109 operations) [11, 12]. At each waypoint along the road from NISQ
to FASQ, the quantum community will be challenged to explore the expanding application space enabled by the hardware
progress.
Several insightful recent articles [13–18] provide valuable
perspective on the quest for useful applications of quantum
technology, and Ref. [19] provides a useful overview of currently known quantum algorithms. Our article covers some of
the same ground, with a particular emphasis on the four gaps
along the road from from NISQ that are highlighted above.
To guide the eye, we assign to each challenge a pictorial (and
clearly highly subjective) “gap score,” where a larger gap indicates a more demanding task.
We are optimistic about the quantum future, and our emphasis on the gaps faced by the quantum community is not
intended to be discouraging. But only by adopting a cleareyed assessment of the gaps that must be surmounted can we

navigate the path to practical quantum utility that benefits the
world.

II.

QUANTUM ERROR MITIGATION AND BEYOND

Currently the most advanced quantum computing modalities
are trapped ions, superconducting circuits, and neutral Rydberg
atoms in optical tweezers, each with characteristic strengths
and weaknesses.
In an ion trap [20–22], each qubit is encoded in a single
electrically charged atom occupying either its ground state or a
long-lived excited state. State preparation, readout, and singlequbit gates are achieved by addressing the qubit with light
pulses from a stable laser. As for other modalities, the most
challenging task is performing an entangling two-qubit gate,
which is achieved in an ion trap by manipulating the coupled
normal modes of vibration of the ions, where the time needed
to execute the gate is typically tens of microseconds. In some
implementations, entangling gates are executed by transporting
ions from storage zones to processing zones; this enables any
qubit in the trap to interact with any other, but induces a further
delay due to the limited speed of ion transport. For scaling
up to large devices, one envisions a modular architecture with
many traps that can share quantum information via optical
interconnects or ion shuttling.
In a superconducting circuit [23–25], qubits are arranged in a
two-dimensional array, usually with nearest-neighbor coupling.
Typically each qubit is a “transmon,” in effect an artificial
atom that (unlike an atomic qubit) needs to be carefully fabricated and frequently calibrated. Each transmon is coupled
to a microwave resonator for readout, and single-qubit gates
are achieved by addressing the qubits with microwave pulses.
An entangling gate can be executed in tens of nanoseconds
by various methods, for example via electronically controlled
tunable couplers between neighboring qubits. To scale up, one
envisions architectures that reduce the number of wires needed
to control the device, and better qubit coherence times attained
by improving materials and fabrication, or by using alternative
qubit designs (see Sec. III).
In one type of neutral-atom device, qubits are atoms held by
an array of optical tweezers [26–29]. As in an ion trap, state
preparation, readout, and single-qubit gates are implemented
by laser pulses. An entangling gate is executed in hundreds of
nanoseconds by driving atoms to highly excited Rydberg states
with strong dipole interactions. A gate can be performed on
any pair of qubits by reconfiguring the tweezers to bring that
pair into close proximity; as is the case in some ion traps, the
cycle time for all-to-all coupling is determined by the limited
speed of qubit transport. Among other challenges, atoms need
to be continually reloaded to enable continuous operation of

3
the device. An alternative approach to quantum computing
with neutral atoms is to store fermionic atoms at the sites of an
optical lattice. In this case, two-qubit gates can be executed via
carefully controlled atomic collisions, and readout with singlesite resolution is performed using quantum gas microscopy
[30].
Quantum circuits have been executed with over 50 qubits on
ion trap platforms [22, 31], over 100 qubits on superconducting
platforms [32, 33] and hundreds of qubits on neutral atom platforms [27]. The hardware quality can be assessed by estimating
gate error rates using randomized benchmarking [34–36]. In
multi-qubit processors, two-qubit gate error rates better than
0.5%, and approaching 0.1% in some cases, are achieved using superconducting [25, 37, 38], trapped ion [21, 22], and
neutral-atom technology [28–30, 39]. Single-qubit gate error
rates are at least an order of magnitude better [40, 41], and
qubit measurement error rates around 1% or better have also
been reported [42]. The performance in all three platforms has
improved steadily, and continual further improvements can be
expected.
Google Quantum AI has extracted a usable signal in quantum random circuit sampling tasks with 103 qubits and 40
layers of two-qubit gates using their Willow processor [43]
(see also Refs. [6, 44]). IBM Quantum has reported successful
execution of certain mirrored kicked Ising quantum circuits
with up to 5000 gates [45] using their Heron processor (see
also Ref. [32]). These experiments helpfully benchmark the
current status of superconducting quantum platforms. Given
today’s two-qubit gate error rates, circuits at this scale need
to be sampled many times in succession to obtain an informative outcome, where the required number of repetitions scales
exponentially with the circuit volume.
This exponential cost in sampling overhead is fundamental
and unavoidable for noisy quantum circuits that are not protected by quantum error correction [46–49]. Indeed, under
depolarizing noise, as one applies additional layers of quantum gates without performing measurements and feedback,
quantum states converge (in trace distance) to the maximally
mixed quantum state [49]. When the qubit number n is asymptotically large and the circuit depth scales like log n, efficient
classical Gibbs sampling algorithms accurately estimate output
expectation values, thereby ruling out any quantum advantage
[50]. For non-unital noise such as amplitude damping, the
noise itself can helpfully remove entropy arising from errors
[51], but nevertheless log-depth random quantum circuits can
be efficiently simulated classically on average [48, 52].
A variety of quantum error mitigation (QEM) schemes can
boost the reachable circuit volume significantly [53]. In QEM
one samples from a family of quantum circuits and then applies classical postprocessing to the outcomes. For example, in
zero-noise extrapolation (ZNE) the noise strength in a circuit
is varied artificially, and postprocessing extrapolates the results
to the limit of zero noise [54]. In probabilistic error cancellation (PEC), the noise is characterized experimentally, and
postprocessing inverts the noise process to recover an unbiased
estimator for the circuit outcome [55, 56]. Using subspace
expansion methods, errors are mitigated by post-processing a
noisy quantum state within a carefully chosen low-dimensional

subspace [57]. Mitigation strategies can also reduce bias arising from measurement errors [58]. QEM methods are essential
for extracting valid results from today’s NISQ processors, but
they become impractical for deep quantum circuits because
the required sampling overhead scales unfavorably with circuit
size [46, 59, 60]; in the worst case, the overhead is exponential
in the product of the depth and width of the quantum circuit.
Quantum error mitigation boosts substantially the circuit
volume that can be executed accurately. However, due to
a sampling overhead cost that scales exponentially with
circuit volume, this method fails for very large circuits.
Using suitable QEM schemes, circuits with 10,000 or more
gates might soon be within reach, even without notable improvements in hardware quality [61, 62]. Circuits with, say,
width 100 and depth 100 might, for example, can provide scientifically valuable insights into the dynamics of many-particle
quantum systems far from equilibrium (see Sec. V).
Thanks to the substantial boost in circuit volume attainable
via quantum error mitigation, NISQ machines with sufficiently low gate error rates might achieve marginally useful
quantum advantage.
In contemplating the prospects for quantum advantage using
NISQ devices, other factors besides circuit width and depth
deserve attention. For example, ion traps and neutral atom
devices have higher connectivity than today’s superconducting
processors, expanding the potential application space. Importantly, superconducting circuits can sample more circuits
because of their higher speed, enhancing the effectiveness of
QEM. Strictly speaking, rigorous lower bounds on the sampling overhead of QEM scale exponentially with the volume
of the backward lightcone of the measured observable [46],
which can be much smaller than the total circuit volume in the
case of low-depth geometrically local circuits. We also note
that QEM schemes [63–68] that operate coherently on multiple
quantum inputs have been proposed; these are not yet practical
but may eventually prove to be valuable.
Both quantum error correction (QEC) and QEM have a
significant overhead cost, but the nature of that overhead is
quite different in the two cases. To protect a quantum circuit
from noise using quantum error correction and fault-tolerant
protocols, many additional physical qubits and physical gates
are needed (see Sec. III). Asymptotically, the overhead cost of
QEC scales favorably — polylogarithmically in the volume of
the circuit we wish to execute; even so, the number of physical
qubits required is beyond the capacity of current hardware.
On the other hand, QEM, which does not require any extra
physical qubits, is feasible today, but the sampling overhead is
exponential in the circuit volume. Therefore, while QEC will
surely be needed to execute very deep circuits, QEM is essential for seeking quantum advantage before the fault-tolerant era.
In fact, even as QEC matures, QEM will continue to be valued for expanding the circuit size fault-tolerant platforms can
reach [69, 70], reducing error-correction overhead at the cost
of increasing sampling overhead [70], and mitigating circuit

4
compilation errors [71].
Quantum error mitigation will continue to be useful in the
FASQ era.

III. FROM PROTECTED QUANTUM MEMORY TO
SCALABLE FAULT-TOLERANT QUANTUM COMPUTATION

The discovery of efficient protocols for fault-tolerant quantum computing is a fundamental advance in our understanding
of the physical universe [72–74]. Assuming that the currently
accepted principles of quantum physics are correct, scientists
and engineers of the future will be able to build extraordinarily
complex quantum systems and control them with exquisite
precision.
This theoretical insight is nearly 30 years old. The first quantum error-correcting codes were discovered in 1995 [7, 75],
and schemes for using these codes to protect quantum computations against noise were formulated the following year [8].
The theory of fault-tolerant quantum computation establishes
that, if the error probabilities for all physical operations are
less than a constant value called the accuracy threshold, and
if the errors are only weakly correlated, then error rates for
protected logical operations can be made arbitrarily small and
therefore arbitrarily long quantum computations can be executed reliably [76–78]. To reduce the logical error rate we
need to increase the number of physical qubits and the number
of physical gates per logical operation, but this overhead cost
is sufficiently mild that we can feel confident that large-scale
quantum computations will eventually be feasible.
An imperfect quantum computing device can accurately
simulate an ideal computation with L logical gates using
O(L polylog L) physical gates, if the noise is sufficiently
weak and not too strongly correlated.
Quantum codes are usefully characterized by the notation
[[n, k, d]], where n is the number of physical qubits in the code
block, k is the number of protected logical qubits, and d is
the code distance. The code can successfully correct up to
(d−1)/2 errors acting on the n physical qubits. It is desirable
for the encoding rate k/n and the relative distance d/n to be
as large as possible, but that is not the whole story.
To perform quantum error correction, one repeatedly executes quantum computations that extract error syndromes, and
then a classical computer inputs the error syndrome history
and outputs a recovery step that is likely to remove most of the
errors without damaging the protected logical quantum information, a procedure called syndrome decoding. In a realistic
setting, the error syndrome is extracted using quantum gates

which are themselves noisy, so it is important that syndrome
extraction be achieved without unacceptable propagation of
error within the code block, and that syndrome decoding be a
feasible classical computation. It is particularly challenging
to devise protocols for performing universal quantum logical
gates on quantum information protected by QEC. For this purpose, unitary physical gates typically do not suffice; instead,
mid-circuit measurements are required [79]. The error propagation incurred by syndrome extraction, and the complexity
of the logical gates and syndrome decoding algorithm, are all
crucial features guiding the choice of suitable QEC codes.
Recent progress in both quantum hardware and QEC theory
has ignited a vibrant interaction between the two. This trend is
driven partly by the realization that QEC will be essential for
running a variety of useful applications, and partly by recognition that QEC opens a fascinating frontier of fundamental
research. Significant experimental milestones and theoretical
advances have occurred in the past few years.
For decades, experimental progress on QEC lagged far
behind theory, but this is starting to change.
Though the onset of the QEC era may be a noteworthy technological milestone, it is still in its very early stages and the
pace of progress is hard to predict. In particular, while the
asymptotic overhead cost of QEC scales reasonably with the
size of the computation we wish to perform, in practice this
cost is quite daunting from the perspective of current technology. To illustrate the predicament, consider the surface code, a
particularly promising approach to early quantum fault tolerance because it can tolerate relatively strong physical noise and
syndrome extraction requires only geometrically local processing in a two-dimensional layout [80, 81]. Based on numerical
simulations [82], the probability of error Plogical for each protected logical operations is related to the probability of error
pphys for each physical two-qubit gate by

Plogical ≈ (0.1)

pphys
pthresh

(d+1)/2
.

(1)

Here pthresh ≈ 10−2 is the code’s accuracy threshold, and d
(assumed to be an odd number) is the code distance. The
number n of physical qubits used to encode each logical qubit
is n = d2 .
Suppose, for example, that we are targeting a logical error
rate Plogical = 10−11 to run a highly parallelized algorithm on
1000 logical qubits for 108 time steps. According to Eq. (1),
assuming pphys = 10−3 (somewhat better than in today’s multiqubit devices), we need d = 19 and hence n = 361 physical
qubits per logical qubit to hit the target. A comparable number
of auxiliary qubits are needed to read out error syndromes, and
additional qubits are needed to execute universal logical gates.
We arrive at a cost of about 1000 physical qubits for each
logical qubit, about 106 physical qubits in total, far beyond
the scale of today’s devices which have hundreds of physical
qubits.
To reach quantum circuits at this scale, we will need a lot
more physical qubits, or much better physical gate error rates

5
(or both). Either path faces formidable challenges. Furthermore, the qubit overhead is not the whole story; in addition,
QEC inflates the time needed to run an algorithm. This may
happen because many rounds of (noisy) syndrome measurements are needed to diagnose errors reliably, and because the
architecture may hinder the parallelism of the logical circuit.
The current state of the art is exemplified by recent results
from the Google Quantum AI team using a superconducting
processor [23]. In a demonstration of a protected quantum
memory hosting a single logical qubit, they performed millions of consecutive rounds of surface-code error syndrome
measurement, each lasting about a microsecond. Significantly,
they found that the logical error rate per measurement round
improves by a factor Λ ≈ 2 as the code distance increases
from 3 to 5 and again from 5 to 7, suggesting that further improvements should be achievable as the code block continues
to increase in size. As the hardware advances, we may anticipate larger values of Λ, larger codes achieving much lower
error rates, and eventually not only protected quantum memory
but also logical two-qubit gates with much better fidelity than
physical gates.
Meanwhile, alternative families of quantum low-density
parity-check (qLDPC) codes have been developed that have a
much higher encoding rate (ratio of number of logical qubits k
to number of physical qubits n) than the surface code [83, 84].
Among these are “good” codes such that k/n and the relative
distance d/n remain bounded away from zero as n approaches
infinity [85–87]. Aside from these asymptotic results, relatively small codes with potential near-term relevance have been
discovered recently. An intriguing example is a [[144, 12, 12]]
code [88]; in contrast to the surface code with the same distance and length which encodes only a single logical qubit, this
code protects 12 logical qubits, a significant improvement in
encoding efficiency.
The catch is that measuring error syndromes for these higherrate codes requires geometrically non-local physical operations.
In superconducting circuits and other solid-state platforms,
long-distance connectivity is hard to achieve but might be attainable via sophisticated fabrication techniques. High-rate
codes are a better fit to atomic-qubit platforms like Rydberg arrays or ion traps, in which high connectivity can be realized by
rearranging atomic positions. In addition, to improve the overhead cost of fault-tolerant quantum computing it is not enough
to reduce the number of physical qubits that encode each logical qubit; we also need schemes for executing universal logical
gates acting on the protected qubits with an acceptable cost.
Here, too, steady theoretical progress is occurring, partly due
to better ideas for tracking how errors propagate through faulttolerant circuits [89–91].
Thanks in part to efficient error correction and logical gates
enabled by qubit movement, impressive demonstrations of
fault-tolerant circuits have been achieved recently using atomic
platforms. These include circuits with 48 logical qubits on a
280-qubit Rydberg tweezer array system [27], and circuits with
12 logical qubits on a 56-qubit ion trap device [92]. However,
so far these demonstrations are limited to just a few rounds
of error syndrome measurement, and postselection is invoked
to achieve low logical error rates. That is, circuit runs are

discarded when errors are detected, a scheme that will not
scale to large circuits. Another issue is that the Rydberg platforms, due to delays caused by slow atomic movement and
slow qubit measurements, have a logical cycle time that is
orders of magnitude longer than superconducting processors.
To run deep circuits with all-to-all coupling enabled by atomic
rearrangement, much faster movement is desired, as well as
faster readout and the ability to continuously load fresh atoms
to replace those that are lost [93].
Fast real-time syndrome decoding [23, 94–96] is necessary
in fault-tolerant quantum computing because we must frequently perform logical operations that are conditioned on
prior measurements of logical blocks. If it takes too long to
decode the measurement outcomes, that will slow down the
logical clock speed [72]. As the size of the quantum circuit
being executed increases, and code blocks grow accordingly
to reach lower logical error rates, this decoding task becomes
harder. Hence, we will need better decoding methods and
faster classical processing as quantum computing scales.
An error-corrected quantum machine will actually be a
hybrid system requiring substantial classical processing
power to decode error syndromes.
We have focused here on superconducting circuits, ion traps,
and Rydberg tweezer arrays because these are the quantum
computing modalities that are now sufficiently advanced for
pioneering explorations of quantum error correction. But with
the fault-tolerant era just beginning to dawn, it remains far
from clear which modality has the best prospects for reaching
broadly useful quantum computers. It is telling that just a few
years ago Rydberg atom platforms were not widely appreciated as a promising quantum technology, yet are now leading
the way toward early fault-tolerant algorithms. It is vital to
continue nurturing a variety of hardware approaches, including
those like photonic and spin qubits that may lag behind for
now but could leap forward in the next few years.
We do not know yet which quantum computing modalities
will be best suited for scaling to large systems that solve
hard problems.
To cross the formidable gap from hundreds of physical
qubits now to millions of physical qubits in future devices will
require heroic advances in systems engineering, but curiositydriven fundamental research will also help to show the way.
Aside from investigating novel modalities that might have unforeseen advantages, we should explore qubit encodings that
have potential to lower physical gate error rates substantially,
thus reducing the qubit count needed to attain very low logical
error rates.
In the arena of superconducting circuits, many variations on
this theme are already under investigation. Today’s most advanced superconducting quantum computing devices are based
on transmons; these are the simplest superconducting qubits
and their quality is steadily improving. But since a logical
qubit with very low error rate will be a very complicated object
due to the hefty overhead cost of quantum error correction, it

6
might pay off to make the physical qubits more complicated if
the resulting gain in performance of the physical gates makes
it easier to realize logical qubits [12].
For example, a fluxionium qubit is more complicated than
a transmon, because its large inductance is achieved with an
array of many Josephson junctions, but the resulting large
anharmonicity enables particularly low two-qubit error rates
[40, 97]. Cat qubits are realized by two-photon dissipation
applied to a microwave resonator, which requires complicated
hardware, but this approach strongly suppresses bit-flip error
rates (while mildly increasing phase-flip error rates), potentially reducing the overhead cost of error correction [98, 99].
In a dual-rail encoding, a single qubit is encoded using a pair
of resonators or transmons; the advantage is that the most
common errors are directly detectable, simplifying the error
correction task [100, 101]. A particularly ambitious approach
to lowering physical gate error rates, and one of the first to
be proposed [102], is encoding an intrinsically robust qubit
in a topological material [103, 104]. A substantial leap forward in physical gate fidelity achieved using any of these or
other strategies could redefine the roadmap to scalable fault
tolerance.
Continuing progress in quantum error correction and fault
tolerance will soon enable quantum technology to enter the
megaquop regime in which circuits with a million or more twoqubit gates can be executed reliably [12]. A megaquop machine
will be able to perform some tasks that are beyond the reach of
classical NISQ, or analog quantum devices. Experience with
these early fault-tolerant quantum computers will guide efforts
to scale up toward more capable systems, and inform the quest
for useful applications.
Early fault-tolerant “megaquop machines,” capable of reliably executing one million or more quantum operations,
will be able to perform some tasks that are beyond the reach
of classical, NISQ, or analog quantum devices.
There are ample opportunities for both hardware breakthroughs and theory advances that could accelerate progress toward scalable fault tolerance. More efficient encoding schemes,
decoding algorithms, and fault-tolerant universal gates customized for the various hardware platforms will be helpful.
Fresh ideas about system architecture may reduce the daunting
requirements for local control of qubits in solid-state platforms
like superconducting circuits. Deeper conceptual insights into
the general principles underlying fault-tolerant quantum computation may suggest entirely new paradigms that reframe the
pursuit of more powerful quantum technologies. Fundamental
research has brought us to the brink of the fault-tolerant era,
and will continue to guide our path to FASQ technology with
broad applications.
To build and operate FASQ machines with practical applications, substantial advances in both systems engineering
and fundamental science will be needed.

IV.

FROM NEAR-TERM QUANTUM HEURISTICS TO
MATURE QUANTUM ALGORITHMS

A variety of potentially useful quantum algorithms are already known that can run on FASQ machines [19, 105], and
we hope to discover many more. Comparatively little is known
about algorithms for machines in the intermediate regime between NISQ and FASQ. How might we bridge this gap and
strengthen the case for near-term quantum utility?
Arguably, quantum computing demonstrations that surpass
classical simulation algorithms have already been achieved in
random circuit sampling experiments involving more than 100
qubits and over 40 layers of two-qubit gates [6, 43, 44, 106–
109]. In this case, it follows from widely believed complexitytheoretic assumptions that the output distribution sampled by
the quantum computation is hard to sample from by any classical procedure. Though the claimed classical hardness is an
asymptotic result and holds for a very stringent measure of
closeness between output distributions only, today’s superconducting processors have attained the scale and accuracy where
classical simulation of the quantum computation is infeasible.
Random circuit sampling is of little practical interest except
for the purpose of benchmarking the quantum computer’s performance, but this achievement is an important milestone, and
efforts to validate the classical hardness have stimulated sizable
improvements in classical methods for simulating quantum circuits [110, 111].
Quantum random circuit sampling experiments demonstrate that today’s NISQ quantum processors can perform
some tasks that are beyond the reach of today’s classical
supercomputers; this is a notable milestone, but not of great
practical interest.
Efforts to realize genuine quantum utility in the NISQ era
have been largely focused on variational quantum algorithms
[112, 113], with potential applications in combinatorial optimization [114] and machine learning [115]. These are hybrid
algorithms in which a quantum and classical computer work
together to perform an optimization task. A quantum processor
executes a circuit with adjustable parameters, and then the
circuit’s output state is measured. The measurement outcome
is reported to a classical computer which returns instructions
for slightly modifying the circuit parameters, for example, by
estimating gradients [116]. This cycle is iterated many times
until convergence, where the goal is to minimize a suitable cost
function.
Can NISQ technology running such variational quantum
algorithms outperform the best classical computers running the
best classical algorithms for solving the same problems? After
years of investigation, we still do not know, but there are rea-

7
sons to be discouraged. One is the barren plateau phenomenon
— if the parametrized quantum circuit is highly expressive,
then the gradient of the cost function tends to be extremely
small, making it difficult to steer the circuit in the right direction [117, 118]. Reducing expressivity can mitigate the
barren plateau problem, but there is evidence that it also makes
variational quantum algorithms easier to simulate classically
[48, 119–124]. Aside from the barren plateau issue, variational
quantum algorithms are often plagued by a plethora of local
minima of the cost function that are concentrated far from the
global minimum [125].
Quantum advantage in variational quantum algorithms has
not been firmly established, and potential obstructions have
been identified.
That said, the potential value of NISQ variational algorithms
remains an open issue. A positive suggestion is that the performance might be substantially improved by strategically choosing the initial parameters of the variational search (a so-called
“warm start”) [126–129]. For example, when seeking a lowenergy state of a local Hamiltonian, one could start with an
approximation provided by a classical heuristic algorithm, or
when solving a combinatorial optimization problem one could
start with the solution to a linear relaxation of the problem that
is efficiently solvable. Conceivably, such stratagems might
help to evade barren plateaus and suboptimal local minima.
Convincing arguments for quantum advantage in end-to-end
variational algorithms have been elusive, but we might make
progress via “proof pockets” that establish advantage for relevant subtasks. By accumulating enough such instances, a more
comprehensive picture may emerge. For example, in the quantum approximate optimization algorithm (QAOA) [114], it is
rigorously established that the optimal values of variational
parameters concentrate [130, 131]; hence, finding near-optimal
parameters for one particular problem instance can advise a
warm start in solving other instances. In addition, single-round
QAOA has a rigorously established advantage over classical
algorithms for problems with suitable symmetries [132]. Notably, in some cases the expensive estimation of gradients can
be avoided by using a dissipative procedure to optimize the
cost function [133, 134]. Further incremental steps like these
will continue to deepen our understanding of the power of
variational quantum algorithms.
The power of end-to-end variational quantum algorithms
can be clarified by “proof pockets” that characterize subtasks of the algorithms.
Beyond the NISQ regime, one may contemplate quantum
advantage in optimization using FASQ machines. For NPhard combinatorial optimization problems, Grover’s algorithm
entails a quadratic speedup in exhaustive search for a satisfying
assignment, and can likewise quadratically speed up heuristic
classical search algorithms [135]. However, this advantage
kicks in only for very large instances, especially when we take
into account the much slower clock speed of FASQ technology
compared with conventional computing. The Grover speedup

may prove to be valuable in the long term, but probably not
until many decades from now [136].
We do not expect quantum computers to find exact solutions to worst-case instances of NP-hard problems efficiently,
but they might be able to find better approximate solutions
than classical computers, or to speed up the search for good
approximate solutions. Variational quantum algorithms running on FASQ machines might realize that kind of advantage,
but they face similar challenges to those confronting NISQ
computers, such as barren plateaus and suboptimal local minima. It is known that directly simulating QAOA is classically
hard [137], but also that log-depth QAOA does not have an
asymptotic quantum advantage in combinatorial optimization
[138] (which does not rule out a practically useful advantage
at modest depth). As an existence proof, one can construct
examples of asymptotic quantum advantage in finding approximate solutions to some optimization problems such as integer
programming [139–141]. This is done by mapping problems
solvable via Shor’s algorithm to optimization tasks, and then
invoking notions of computational learning theory [139] or a
variant of the theory of probabilistically checkable proofs to
show that finding an approximate solution is classically hard
[140]. Oracle-based subexponential quantum advantages in
adiabatic optimization have also been identified [142, 143].
New paradigms for seeking quantum advantage have
emerged recently [144]. A particularly intriguing fresh approach is decoded quantum interferometry [145, 146] (DQI),
in which the quantum Fourier transform maps a problem that
seems classically hard to a decoding problem that is easy to
solve classically. In particular, DQI provides an efficient quantum algorithm for optimal polynomial intersection (OPI) which
achieves a better approximation ratio than any currently known
classical algorithm for a variant of polynomial interpolation.
Recent work indicates that directly simulating DQI is classically hard [147], but also that DQI provides no quantum advantage in unstructured combinatorial optimization problems
[148]. The potential quantum advantage achieved by DQI for
structured problems like OPI is currently under investigation,
as are the possible practical applications of such an advantage.
Artificial intelligence (AI) is transforming both science and
technology, but faces obstacles such as the time and electrical
power needed to train machine learning models. Hence it is
natural to consider the potential power of combining quantum
computing with machine learning (ML) [115, 149]. Quantum
ML is particularly well suited to address problems in quantum
many-particle physics that are presumed to be classically hard
(see Sec. V). But what are the prospects for quantum advantage
in tasks to which ML is currently applied?
Though compelling empirical evidence validates the scientific and economic value of AI as practiced today, we lack a
rigorous understanding of what classical ML can and cannot
do efficiently, which makes it all the more challenging to assess potential quantum advantages. The exponentially large
Hilbert space of a many-qubit quantum system encourages
speculation that mapping classical data to that large feature
space can significantly enhance learning [150], but an important caveat is that the high cost of loading a large classical
data set into the quantum device may offset the advantage of

8
quantumly processing the data [151]. Another proposal, that
quantum advantage in ML derives from the ability to perform
linear algebra tasks efficiently in an exponentially large space
[152], was “dequantized” when efficient classical sampling
algorithms were formulated to perform the same task [153].
Furthermore, the data encountered in practical machine learning tasks tends to be noisy with little discernible structure [154],
while known performant quantum algorithms typically solve
highly structured problems. The barren plateau problem cited
above also raises concerns about the cost of training quantum
neural networks.
For some carefully chosen learning problems, quantum advantage follows from widely accepted classical hardness assumptions. Examples of learning tasks for which quantum
advantage has been rigorously established include generative
modeling [155] (learning to sample accurately from a target
distribution), density modeling [156] (learning to return probability weights for sample inputs), binary classification [150]
(learning to sort data into two classes), and identification [157]
(learning to assign unique labels to sample inputs). Such results
are mildly encouraging, but these models are highly contrived
and therefore do not yet provide much helpful guidance about
where practically useful learning advantages should be sought.
On a more positive note, there are indications that quantum
algorithms can speed up the training of some classical neural
networks for realistic classical data, for example by accelerating stochastic gradient descent [158], or by invoking quantum
linear system solvers to train generative models [159].

The potential for useful quantum advantage in end-to-end
machine learning tasks remains largely unknown. Speedups
have been established for some cherry-picked examples, but
robust quantum advantages for large families of instances
remain elusive.

The quantum linear systems algorithm [160] solves inversion of a sparse and well-conditioned matrix in time scaling
logarithmically with the size of the matrix, where both the
input and output are quantum states. Furthermore, the runtime
scales polylogarithmically in the precision of the solution [161].
This algorithm, together with adaptive-order finite-difference
methods and spectral methods, can be applied to solve linear
partial differential equations with a quantum speedup [162].
Such algorithms may have real-life applications in the FASQ
regime, but various open issues still need to be addressed, such
as encoding suitable boundary conditions, applying effective
preconditioners, and extracting usable information from measurements of the output state. Extending these methods to
nonlinear and stochastic differential equations would significantly expand their utility [163, 164].

Various quantum algorithms are known that can achieve
quantum advantage in the FASQ regime, but finding useful
applications to real-life problems remains challenging.

V.

TOWARD CREDIBLE QUANTUM ADVANTAGE IN
QUANTUM SIMULATION

Dirac may have been the first to articulate clearly that quantum mechanics provides a theory of everything that matters in
everyday life [165]. It is the Schrödinger equation that governs
many electrons interacting electromagnetically with each other
and with atomic nuclei. In principle, this equation explains
all of chemistry and materials science, and everything built
on those foundations. Sadly, Dirac lamented, this equation is
“much too complicated to be soluble” for systems with more
than a few electrons. It took over fifty years before Feynman
[1] proposed that a machine that computes quantum properties
of many strongly interacting particles should be a quantum
machine rather than a conventional computer.
Dirac’s claim that many-electron problems are too hard to
solve (classically) is in some respects misleading. Heuristic
classical algorithms for this problem, such as density functional
theory [166], are often quite successful in cases of practical
interest. Furthermore, as both algorithms and hardware continually advance, classical methods are conquering more and
more challenging problems. Quantum computing targets the
(now) relatively small “strongly correlated” corner of chemistry
and materials research, where classical methods falter. Because
strongly correlated matter is poorly understood at present, it
is difficult to foresee clearly how quantum simulations might
drive future progress in fundamental science.
Meanwhile, classical artificial intelligence is driving
progress in many scientific fields. For now, applications of
AI to quantum matter are hampered by a dearth of training
data in the strongly correlated regime. We may anticipate that
simulations by future quantum machines will provide abundant
training data, enhancing the power of classical AI to make
useful predictions about strongly correlated matter that has not
yet been observed in the laboratory [167, 168].
Quantum simulations [169–173] typically address either
static properties of matter in equilibrium or dynamical properties of matter out of equilibrium. These simulations can
be conducted using either digital gate-based quantum computers (digital quantum simulation) or analog platforms with
precisely tunable Hamiltonians (analog quantum simulation).
Both types of problems, and both types of quantum platforms,
have significant scientific value.
A commonly studied task is finding the energy of the ground
state of a local Hamiltonian. The fundamental degrees of freedom may be qubits, bosonic modes, or fermionic modes, and
“local” means that the Hamiltonian is a sum of terms where
each term couples together a number of degrees of freedom
that is independent of the system’s total size. In some cases,
particularly in the study of materials, the Hamiltonian is “geometrically local,” meaning that the degrees of freedom are

9
arranged in a one-, two-, or three-dimensional array and those
that couple are in close proximity to one another. An exact solution can be found classically by diagonalizing the Hamiltonian,
but this is feasible only for small systems. For larger systems
a variety of heuristic classical methods are used, such as density functional theory [166], tensor networks [174], and neural
networks [175]. These typically lack performance guarantees
(some tensor-network methods being notable exceptions), but
can be executed efficiently in some physically relevant cases
and often give accurate results in practice, particularly in onedimensional systems that are not too highly entangled.
There are efficient quantum algorithms for preparing the
ground state of a local Hamiltonian on a quantum computer
and then measuring observables in that state, including the total
energy [176, 177]. However, these are guaranteed to work only
if an input state can be prepared that has a sizeable overlap
with ground state, and this is not always feasible. A generalpurpose approach to preparing a good approximation to the
ground state is the adiabatic method — one simulates a timedependent Hamiltonian that interpolates between an initial noninteracting Hamiltonian whose ground state is easily prepared
and a final target Hamiltonian whose ground state is desired.
This method is effective if one can identify a gapped adiabatic
path that connects the target ground state to the trivial ground
state. However, it is likely to fail if the path crosses a firstorder phase transition where the gap vanishes and the quantum
state must change sharply to remain close to the instantaneous
ground state along the path. Another approach is the dissipative
method, in which one simulates coupling the target system to
a cold thermal bath [178, 179]. This method fails if the cooled
system takes a long time to thermalize, for example because
its Hamiltonian has a complex energy landscape. In the cases
where a reasonably good approximation to the ground state
can be prepared efficiently on a quantum computer, one might
question whether the ground-state problem is really classically
hard [180]. For this reason, it has been challenging to argue
persuasively that particular Hamiltonians of physical interest
are hard to minimize classically and easy to minimize using
digital quantum simulators.
It is challenging to argue convincingly that ground-state
problems for particular Hamiltonians of physical interest
are both classically hard and quantumly easy.
Aside from studying static properties of equilibrium states,
one can also use quantum platforms to study the Hamiltonian
time evolution of systems that are far from equilibrium, including systems that are suddenly quenched [171, 181, 182] or
subject to external driving and dissipative processes [183]. Dynamical phenomena provide a particularly promising arena for
quantum advantage because classical algorithms for simulating
dynamics are less developed and less effective than algorithms
for computing static properties (although the classical methods
have been improving rapidly recently [184–187]). The classical simulations are especially challenging for systems that
become highly entangled and are therefore difficult to describe
accurately in terms of classical data.
A typical dynamical quantum simulation has three stages:

First an initial quantum state is prepared in the device. Then
the state evolves forward in time via either a digital quantum
circuit or the programmable dynamics of an analog device.
Finally, observables of interest are measured in the final state.
To determine expectation values of the output observables with
useful statistical accuracy, this three-stage procedure must be
repeated many times [169, 170, 181].
In condensed matter physics or high-energy physics, the relevant observables are typically few-body correlation functions
of local operators which in principle are accessible in physical
experiments. Hence, the final measurements may be relatively
easy to simulate, but both the initial state preparation and the
time evolution can be more demanding. For example, one
might be interested in the evolution of localized excitations of
the equilibrium state which are at least as difficult to prepare
as the equilibrium state itself. Evolution governed by a local
Hamiltonian can be simulated using Trotter approximations
[188], but these require high circuit depth to attain good accuracy [189]. There are more sophisticated methods using tools
like quantum signal processing [190] and qubitization [191]
that have more favorable asymptotic costs, but these seem less
attractive in the near term because many auxiliary qubits are
needed.
Although the circuit complexity of dynamical quantum simulation may be daunting in practice, at least in principle it scales
reasonably with both the spacetime volume we wish to simulate
and the accuracy we wish to attain [192]. In this formal sense,
simulation is “quantumly easy” assuming that preparation of
the initial state is feasible. What’s less easy to pin down is the
classical hardness of performing the same task. Any problem
that can be solved efficiently by a quantum computer can be
mapped to dynamical simulation governed by a local Hamiltonian, so we are assured that (if quantum advantage exists for
any problem) then there are carefully curated Hamiltonians
such that dynamical simulation is classically hard [193]. But
knowing that does not help us answer whether the simulation
task is classically hard for some particular physically relevant
family of Hamiltonians.
Just as for quantum algorithms more broadly, we may anticipate an ongoing competition between quantum teams who
run simulations on quantum hardware, and classical teams
who try to match or surpass the results using conventional
computers (often based on tensor-network, neural-network, or
Pauli-path methods), a line of thought dating back to 2011
[181]. Indeed, that competition is increasingly under way.
For example, the results of a heroic quantum simulation of
a two-dimensional kicked Ising model using 127 qubits on
IBM hardware [194], initially claimed to be a demonstration
of quantum utility, were quickly matched by classical calculations using both tensor-network methods [195] and sparse
Pauli dynamics [196]. Results of an impressive simulation of
rapidly quenched spin-glass dynamics using D-Wave hardware
[197], also reported as beyond the reach of classical methods,
have been partially reproduced using classical tensor-network
simulations [198]. This healthy back-and-forth between quantum and classical simulation teams is helpful and stimulating
for both sides, but making a fair comparison involves some
subtleties. Classical simulations are often limited to small

10
system size, and quantum simulations have limited accuracy.
Furthermore, more information can be extracted from the output of a classical simulation than from the output state of a
quantum simulation, even when the quantum simulation is
repeated many times.
Although quantum simulations in the NISQ era may not
have very high accuracy, they might still be qualitatively informative. A recent example illustrating the state of the art is a
computation of out-of-time-order correlators (OTOCs) using
103 qubits on a Google superconducting processor in a regime
that is arguably hard to simulate classically [33]. To acquire
quantitatively useful data, fault-tolerant quantum computers
will most likely be needed, but useful quantum advantage might
be attained in simulations of strongly-coupled lattice systems
in two dimensions using relatively near-term digital machines
in the megaquop to gigaquop regime. Thoughtful co-design of
fault-tolerant architectures and simulation algorithms will help
to ensure that useful simulations are reached sooner.
In contrast to a circuit-based digital universal quantum computer, an analog quantum simulator is a quantum system with
many degrees of freedom that can be tuned to resemble a model
system we wish to study and understand. Some of the same
experimental platforms, for example Rydberg tweezer arrays
[28, 199, 200], other ultracold-atom platforms [171, 181], superconducting circuits [201], and trapped ions [172, 173], can
be used for both purposes. While interesting digital quantum simulations of many-particle quantum systems are just
starting to become possible now, analog simulations of such
systems have been studied productively for over two decades
[171–173].
The fundamental elements of an analog simulator can include harmonic resonators or fermionic atoms, evading the
overhead cost of simulating those elements using qubits. In
a particularly powerful analog approach, ultracold fermions
may be trapped in optical lattices with single-site addressability
[202–206]. These systems illuminate properties of strongly correlated systems that are difficult to access in conventional solidstate experiments, and for much larger system size than can be
reached with today’s digital quantum platforms. For example,
phase diagrams of Hubbard-like models can be explored, and
emergent hydrodynamic transport of spin and charge can be
studied. Recent evidence suggests that fermionic models are
intrinsically harder to simulate than spin models [207].
Despite these undeniable advantages, analog platforms also
have some drawbacks. Strongly correlated physics of interest
may emerge only at very low temperatures that are hard to
reach experimentally, and due to imperfect control the actual
Hamiltonian in the lab may differ significantly from that of the
target system. This issue might be partially mitigated by validating the Hamiltonian using Hamiltonian-learning algorithms
[208, 209]. We also note that the accuracy of an analog simulator may be considerably better than worst-case error bounds
would indicate, because errors are likely to partially cancel out
[210–212]. The digital approach affords greater flexibility in
the choice of initial state and Hamiltonian, and admits quantum error correction for more robust control. As happened in
conventional computing, analog quantum simulators may eventually become obsolete. However, given the hefty overhead

cost of quantum fault tolerance, analog platforms will maintain
notable discovery potential well into the future, especially in
studies of quantum dynamics far from equilibrium.
Analog quantum simulators may be surpassed by digital
quantum simulators eventually, but in the near term they
are powerful tools for scientific exploration, well suited for
studies of quantum dynamics.
Not only do we want quantum simulators to solve classically
hard problems, we also want them to provide useful knowledge beyond what would otherwise be accessible. According
to a recent estimate from a High Performance Computing facility operated by the U.S. Department of Energy [213], over
30% of compute cycles are spent on density functional theory computations for chemistry and materials science, over
18% on lattice quantum chromodynamics, and about 2.6% on
chemistry algorithms other than DFT. These numbers provide
a rough indication of the level of activity relating to quantum
problems in the computational physical sciences, and do not
include additional topics like molecular dynamics and fusion
energy which also account for a large fraction of the computational workload and where more precise treatment of quantum
effects might yield improved results.
Classical computing will continue to be widely and productively used in this problem space, but we are optimistic that
quantum simulation will provide surprising insights beyond
the scope of classical methods. We anticipate discovering
new highly entangled phases of matter, both in equilibrium
and far from equilibrium, and exploring properties of strongly
coupled quantum systems that are beyond the reach of other
computational methods. We expect substantial impact first in
condensed matter physics, later in chemistry, and eventually
in high energy physics and even quantum gravity. While we
are confident about the potential of quantum simulators as
tools for scientific discovery, it is more difficult to predict their
usefulness for industrial applications.
Quantum simulations on digital and analog quantum platforms will be scientifically informative, but their economic
value is less clear.

VI.

OUTLOOK

The rapid recent advance of quantum science and technology has drawn attention not just from scientists but also from
commercial ventures and government policy makers. Quantum
computers with broadly useful applications are eagerly anticipated but are challenging to realize. In this article we have
emphasized that to navigate the road from today’s NISQ era
to tomorrow’s FASQ machines the quantum community must
“mind the gaps” that block the way. We have highlighted in particular the daunting quest for scalable fault-tolerant quantum
computers and the crucial hunt for practical quantum advantages over conventional information processing. We stress,
though, that the portolio of useful applications is likely to expand gradually as quantum technology advances through the

11
megaquop, gigaquop, and teraquop regimes.
How will quantum technology advance science and benefit
society? Efforts to envision the long-term impact of quantum
technology on the world are hampered by our limited imaginations — the history of classical computing vividly illustrates
that predicting the future course of information technology is
beyond our grasp. In a letter to Lewis Strauss in 1945, John
von Neumann reflected on the potential value of high-speed
electronic computers. After delineating some prospective applications, he wisely opined [214]:
[T]he projected device [. . . ] is so radically new
that many of its uses will become clear only after
it has been put into operation [. . . ]. [T]hese uses
which are not, or not easily, predictable now, are
likely to be the most important ones. Indeed they
are by definition those which we do not recognize at present because they are farthest removed
from what is now feasible, and they will therefore
constitute the most surprising and farthest-going
extension of our present sphere of action . . .
Just as von Neumann could not envision the digital revolution that would eventually unfold, we cannot hope to foresee
today the most impactful future applications of quantum computers. Arguably our task is all the more hopeless because
quantum information processing entails an even larger step
beyond past experience. Despite our best efforts to predict

[1] R. P. Feynman, Simulating physics with computers, Int. J. Th.
Phys. 21, 467 (1982).
[2] R. P. Feynman, Quantum mechanical computers, Found. Phys.
16, 507 (1986).
[3] D. Deutsch, Quantum theory, the Church-Turing principle and
the universal quantum computer, Proc. Roy. Soc. A 400, 97
(1985).
[4] P. W. Shor, Algorithms for quantum computation: discrete
logarithms and factoring, Proc. 50th Ann. Symp. Found. Comp.
Sc. , 124 (1994).
[5] J. Preskill, Quantum computing in the NISQ era and beyond,
Quantum 2, 79 (2018).
[6] A. Morvan, B. Villalonga, X. Mi, S. Mandrà, A. Bengtsson,
P. Klimov, Z. Chen, S. Hong, C. Erickson, I. Drozdov, et al.,
Phase transitions in random circuit sampling, Nature 634, 328
(2024).
[7] P. W. Shor, Scheme for reducing decoherence in quantum computer memory, Phys. Rev. A 52, R2493 (1995).
[8] P. W. Shor, Fault-tolerant quantum computation, in Proceedings
of 37th conference on foundations of computer science (IEEE,
1996) pp. 56–65.
[9] J. Lee, D. W. Berry, C. Gidney, W. J. Huggins, J. R. McClean,
N. Wiebe, and R. Babbush, Even more efficient quantum computations of chemistry through tensor hypercontraction, PRX
Quantum 2, 030305 (2021).
[10] C. Gidney, How to factor 2048 bit RSA integers with less than
a million noisy qubits, (2025), arXiv:2505.15917.
[11] D. Bacon, Software of QIP, by QIP, and for QIP (2022), keynote
presentation at QIP 2022.

the important applications, tomorrow’s quantum computers
are sure to delight and benefit us in ways we cannot currently
anticipate. Before that happens, we have a lot of work to do.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are grateful to Steve Flammia for helpful and insightful
comments about this article, and to many other colleagues for
years of stimulating discussions about the quest for quantum advantage. The work of J. E. has been supported by the BMFTR
(DAQC, MUNIQC-Atoms, QuSol, PasQuops), the Munich
Quantum Valley (K-4 and K-8), the QuantERA (HQCC),
the Quantum Flagship (PasQuans2, Millenion), QuantERA
(HQCC), the Clusters of Excellence MATH+ and ML4Q, the
DFG (CRC183), the Einstein Foundation (Einstein Research
Unit on Quantum Devices), Berlin Quantum, and the ERC
(DebuQC). The work of J. P. has been supported in part by
the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, National
Quantum Information Science Research Centers, Quantum
Systems Accelerator, by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Accelerated Research in Quantum Computing,
Quantum Utility through Advanced Computational Quantum
Algorithms (QUACQ) and Fundamental Algorithmic Research
toward Quantum Utility (FAR-Qu), and by the National Science Foundation (PHY-2317110). The Institute for Quantum
Information and Matter is an NSF Physics Frontiers Center.

[12] J. Preskill, Beyond NISQ: The megaquop machine, ACM Trans.
Quant. Comp. 6, 1 (2025).
[13] Z. Zimborás, B. Koczor, Z. Holmes, E.-M. Borrelli, A. Gilyén,
H.-Y. Huang, Z. Cai, A. Acín, L. Aolita, L. Banchi, et al.,
Myths around quantum computation before full fault tolerance:
What no-go theorems rule out and what they don’t, (2025),
arXiv:2501.05694.
[14] R. King, Quantum algorithms: A call to action (2025).
[15] S. Aaronson, A. M. Childs, E. Farhi, A. W. Harrow, and
B. C. Sanders, Future of quantum computing, (2025),
arXiv:2506.19232.
[16] O. Lanes, M. Beji, A. D. Corcoles, C. Dalyac, J. M. Gambetta, L. Henriet, A. Javadi-Abhari, A. Kandala, A. Mezzacapo,
C. Porter, et al., A framework for quantum advantage, (2025),
arXiv:2506.20658.
[17] H.-Y. Huang, S. Choi, J. R. McClean, and J. Preskill, The vast
world of quantum advantage, (2025), arXiv:2508.05720.
[18] E. Kapit, P. Love, J. Larson, A. Sornborger, E. Crane,
A. Schuckert, T. Tomesh, F. Chong, and S. Kais, Roadblocks
and opportunities in quantum algorithms – insights from the
National Quantum Initiative Joint Algorithms Workshop, May
20-22, 2024, (2025), arXiv:2508.13973.
[19] A. M. Dalzell, S. McArdle, M. Berta, P. Bienias, C.-F. Chen,
A. Gilyén, C. T. Hann, M. J. Kastoryano, E. T. Khabiboulline,
A. Kubica, et al., Quantum algorithms: A survey of applications
and end-to-end complexities, (2023), arXiv:2310.03011.
[20] H. Haeffner, C. F. Roos, and R. Blatt, Quantum computing with
trapped ions, Phys. Rep. 469, 155 (2008).

12
[21] J.-S. Chen, E. Nielsen, M. Ebert, V. Inlek, K. Wright, V. Chaplin, A. Maksymov, E. Páez, A. Poudel, P. Maunz, and J. Gamble,
Benchmarking a trapped-ion quantum computer with 30 qubits,
Quantum 8, 1516 (2024).
[22] M. DeCross et al., Computational power of random quantum circuits in arbitrary geometries, Phys. Rev. X 15, 021052
(2025).
[23] R. Acharya et al., Quantum error correction below the surface
code threshold, (2024), arxiv:2408.13687.
[24] D. Castelvecchi, IBM releases first-ever 1,000-qubit quantum
chip, Nature 624, 238 (2023).
[25] S. Bravyi, O. Dial, J. M. Gambetta, D. Gil, and Z. Nazario, The
future of quantum computing with superconducting qubits, J.
Applied Phys. 132, 160902 (2022).
[26] H. Bernien, S. Schwartz, A. Keesling, H. Levine, A. Omran,
H. Pichler, S. Choi, A. S. Zibrov, M. Endres, M. Greiner,
V. Vuletic, and M. Lukin, Probing many-body dynamics on a
51-atom quantum simulator, Nature 551, 579 (2017).
[27] D. Bluvstein, S. J. Evered, A. A. Geim, S. H. Li, H. Zhou,
T. Manovitz, S. Ebadi, M. Cain, M. Kalinowski, D. Hangleiter,
J. P. Bonilla Ataides, N. Maskara, I. Cong, X. Gao, P. S.
Rodriguez, T. Karolyshyn, G. Semeghini, M. J. Gullans,
M. Greiner, V. Vuletic, and M. D. Lukin, Logical quantum
processor based on reconfigurable atom arrays, Nature 626, 58
(2024).
[28] M. Saffman, T. G. Walker, and K. Mølmer, Quantum information with Rydberg atoms, Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 2313 (2010).
[29] S. J. Evered, D. Bluvstein, M. Kalinowski, S. Ebadi,
T. Manovitz, H. Zhou, S. H. Li, A. A. Geim, T. T. Wang,
N. Maskara, H. Levine, G. Semeghini, M. Greiner, V. Vuletić,
and M. D. Lukin, High-fidelity parallel entangling gates on a
neutral-atom quantum computer, Nature 622, 268 (2023).
[30] P. Bojović, T. Hilker, S. Wang, J. Obermeyer, M. Barendregt,
D. Tell, T. Chalopin, P. M. Preiss, I. Bloch, and T. Franz, Highfidelity collisional quantum gates with fermionic atoms, (2025),
arXiv:2506.14711.
[31] M. Liu, R. Shaydulin, P. Niroula, M. DeCross, S.-H. Hung,
W. Y. Kon, E. Cervero-Martín, K. Chakraborty, O. Amer,
S. Aaronson, et al., Certified randomness using a trapped-ion
quantum processor, Nature 618, 500 (2025).
[32] Y. Kim, A. Eddins, S. Anand, K. X. Wei, E. Van Den Berg,
S. Rosenblatt, H. Nayfeh, Y. Wu, M. Zaletel, K. Temme, et al.,
Evidence for the utility of quantum computing before fault
tolerance, Nature 618, 500 (2023).
[33] D. A. Abanin, R. Acharya, L. Aghababaie-Beni, G. Aigeldinger,
A. Ajoy, R. Alcaraz, I. Aleiner, T. I. Andersen, M. Ansmann,
F. Arute, et al., Constructive interference at the edge of quantum
ergodic dynamics, (2025), arXiv:2506.10191.
[34] E. Knill, Leibfried, R. Reichle, J. Britton, R. B. Blakestad,
J., Jost, C. Langer, R. Ozeri, S. Seidelin, and J. Wineland,
Randomized benchmarking of quantum gates, Phys. Rev. A 77,
012307 (2008).
[35] J. Eisert, D. Hangleiter, N. Walk, I. Roth, D. Markham,
R. Parekh, U. Chabaud, and E. Kashefi, Quantum certification and benchmarking, Nature Rev. Phys. 2, 382 (2020).
[36] A. Hashim, L. B. Nguyen, N. Goss, B. Marinelli, R. K. Naik,
T. Chistolini, J. Hines, J. Marceaux, Y. Kim, P. Gokhale,
T. Tomesh, S. Chen, L. Jiang, S. Ferracin, K. Rudinger, T. Proctor, K. C. Young, I. Siddiqi, and R. Blume-Kohout, Practical
introduction to benchmarking and characterization of quantum
computers, PRX Quantum 6, 030202 (2025).
[37] IQM, IQM quantum computers achieves new technology milestones with 99.9% 2-qubit gate fidelity and 1 millisecond coherence time (2024).

[38] Google Quantum AI, Willow spec sheet (2024).
[39] T. M. Graham, Y. Song, J. Scott, C. Poole, L. Phuttitarn,
K. Jooya, P. Eichler, X. Jiang, A. Marra, B. Grinkemeyer,
M. Kwon, M. Ebert, J. Cherek, M. T. Lichtman, M. Gillette,
J. Gilbert, D. Bowman, T. Ballance, C. Campbell, E. D. Dahl,
O. Crawford, N. S. Blunt, B. Rogers, T. Noel, and M. Saffman,
Multi-qubit entanglement and algorithms on a neutral-atom
quantum computer, Nature 604, 457 (2022).
[40] D. A. Rower, L. Ding, H. Zhang, M. Hays, J. An, P. M. Harrington, I. T. Rosen, J. M. Gertler, T. M. Hazard, B. M. Niedzielski,
M. E. Schwartz, S. Gustavsson, K. Serniak, J. A. Grover, and
W. D. Oliver, Suppressing counter-rotating errors for fast singlequbit gates with fluxonium, PRX Quantum 5, 040342 (2024).
[41] Z. Li, P. Liu, P. Zhao, Z. Mi, H. Xu, X. Liang, T. Su, W. Sun,
G. Xue, J.-N. Zhang, W. Liu, Y. Jin, and H. Yu, npj Quant. Inf.
9, 111 (2023).
[42] A. Bengtsson, A. Opremcak, M. Khezri, D. Sank, A. Bourassa,
K. J. Satzinger, S. Hong, C. Erickson, B. J. Lester, K. C. Miao,
A. N. Korotkov, J. Kelly, Z. Chen, and P. V. Klimov, Modelbased optimization of superconducting qubit readout, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 132, 100603 (2024).
[43] H. Neven, Meet willow, our state-of-the-art quantum chip
(2024).
[44] D. Gao, D. Fan, C. Zha, J. Bei, G. Cai, J. Cai, S. Cao, F. Chen,
J. Chen, K. Chen, et al., Establishing a new benchmark in
quantum computational advantage with 105-qubit Zuchongzhi
3.0 processor, Phys. Rev. Lett. 134, 090601 (2025).
[45] IBM Newsroom, IBM launches its most advanced quantum
computers, fueling new scientific value and progress towards
quantum advantage (2024).
[46] Y. Quek, D. S. França, S. Khatri, J. J. Meyer, and J. Eisert,
Exponentially tighter bounds on limitations of quantum error,
mitigation, Nature Phys. 20, 1648 (2024).
[47] T. Schuster, C. Yin, X. Gao, and N. Y. Yao, A polynomialtime classical algorithm for noisy quantum circuits, (2024),
arXiv:2407.12768.
[48] A. A. Mele, A. Angrisani, S. Ghosh, S. Khatri, J. Eisert, D. S.
França, and Y. Quek, Noise-induced shallow circuits and absence of barren plateaus, (2024), arXiv:2403.13927.
[49] A. Deshpande, P. Niroula, O. Shtanko, A. V. Gorshkov, B. Fefferman, and M. J. Gullans, Tight bounds on the convergence of
noisy random circuits to the uniform distribution, PRX Quantum 3, 040329 (2022).
[50] D. Stilck Franca and R. García-Patrón, Limitations of optimization algorithms on noisy quantum devices, Nature Phys. 17,
1221 (2020).
[51] M. Ben-Or, D. Gottesman, and A. Hassidim, Quantum refrigerator, (2013), arXiv:1301.1995.
[52] A. Angrisani, A. A. Mele, M. S. Rudolph, M. Cerezo, and
Z. Holmes, Simulating quantum circuits with arbitrary local
noise using Pauli propagation, (2025), arxiv:2501.13101.
[53] Z. Cai, R. Babbush, S. C. Benjamin, S. Endo, W. J. Huggins,
Y. Li, J. R. McClean, and T. E. O’Brien, Quantum error mitigation, Rev. Mod. Phys. 95, 045005 (2023).
[54] T. Giurgica-Tiron, Y. Hindy, R. LaRose, A. Mari, and W. J.
Zeng, Digital zero noise extrapolation for quantum error mitigation, 2020 IEEE Int. Conf. Quant. Comp. Eng. (QCE) , 306
(2020).
[55] A. Mari, N. Shammah, and W. J. Zeng, Extending quantum
probabilistic error cancellation by noise scaling, Phys. Rev. A
104, 052607 (2021).
[56] R. LaRose, A. Mari, S. Kaiser, P. J. Karalekas, A. A. Alves,
P. Czarnik, M. E. Mandouh, M. H. Gordon, Y. Hindy, A. Robertson, P. Thakre, M. Wahl, D. Samuel, R. Mistri, M. Tremblay,

13
N. Gardner, N. T. Stemen, N. Shammah, and W. J. Zeng, Mitiq: A software package for error mitigation on noisy quantum
computers, Quantum 6, 774 (2022).
[57] J. R. McClean, Z. Jiang, N. C. Rubin, R. Babbush, and
H. Neven, Decoding quantum errors with subspace expansions,
Nature Comm. 11, 636 (2020).
[58] F. B. Maciejewski, Z. Zimborás, and M. Oszmaniec, Mitigation
of readout noise in near-term quantum devices by classical
post-processing based on detector tomography, Quantum 4,
257 (2020).
[59] R. Takagi, H. Tajima, and M. Gu, Universal sampling lower
bounds for quantum error mitigation, Phys. Rev. Lett. 131,
210602 (2023).
[60] R. Takagi, S. Endo, S. Minagawa, and M. Gu, Fundamental limits of quantum error mitigation, npj Quant. Inf. 8, 114 (2022),
arXiv:2210.11505.
[61] D. Aharonov, O. Alberton, I. Arad, Y. Atia, E. Bairey, Z. Brakerski, I. Cohen, O. Golan, I. Gurwich, O. Kenneth, et al., On
the importance of error mitigation for quantum computation,
(2025), arXiv:2503.17243.
[62] D. Aharonov, O. Alberton, I. Arad, Y. Atia, E. Bairey, M. B.
Dov, A. Berkovitch, Z. Brakerski, I. Cohen, E. Fuchs, et al., Reliable high-accuracy error mitigation for utility-scale quantum
circuits, (2025), arXiv:2508.10997.
[63] J. Cotler, S. Choi, A. Lukin, H. Gharibyan, T. Grover, M. E. Tai,
M. Rispoli, R. Schittko, P. M. Preiss, A. M. Kaufman, et al.,
Quantum virtual cooling, Phys. Rev. X 9, 031013 (2019).
[64] A. Seif, Z.-P. Cian, S. Zhou, S. Chen, and L. Jiang, Shadow
distillation: Quantum error mitigation with classical shadows
for near-term quantum processors, PRX Quantum 4, 010303
(2023).
[65] W. J. Huggins, S. McArdle, T. E. O’Brien, J. Lee, N. C. Rubin,
S. Boixo, K. B. Whaley, R. Babbush, and J. R. McClean, Virtual distillation for quantum error mitigation, Phys. Rev. X 11,
041036 (2021).
[66] B. Koczor, Exponential error suppression for near-term quantum devices, Phys. Rev. X 11, 031057 (2021).
[67] E. Onorati, J. Kitzinger, J. Helsen, M. Ioannou, A. H. Werner,
I. Roth, and J. Eisert, Noise-mitigated randomized measurements and self-calibrating shadow estimation, (2024),
arXiv:2403.04751.
[68] Z. Liu, X. Zhang, Y.-Y. Fei, and Z. Cai, Virtual channel purification, (2024), arXiv:2402.07866.
[69] M. A. Wahl, A. Mari, N. Shammah, W. J. Zeng, and G. S. Ravi,
Zero noise extrapolation on logical qubits by scaling the error
correction code distance, 2023 IEEE Int. Conf. Quant. Comp.
Eng. (QCE) 1, 888 (2023).
[70] Y. Suzuki, S. Endo, K. Fujii, and Y. Tokunaga, Quantum error
mitigation as a universal error reduction technique: Applications from the NISQ to the fault-tolerant quantum computing
eras, PRX Quantum 3, 010345 (2022).
[71] G. Camilo, T. O. Maciel, A. Tosta, A. Alhajri, T. de Lima Silva,
D. S. França, and L. Aolita, Compilation-informed probabilistic
quantum error cancellation, (2025), arXiv:2508.20174.
[72] B. M. Terhal, Quantum error correction for quantum memories,
Rev. Mod. Phys. 87, 307 (2015).
[73] E. T. Campbell, B. M. Terhal, and C. Vuillot, Roads towards
fault-tolerant universal quantum computation, Nature 549, 172
(2017).
[74] J. Roffe, Quantum error correction: An introductory guide,
Contemp. Phys. 60, 226 (2019).
[75] A. M. Steane, Error correcting codes in quantum theory, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 77, 793 (1996).

[76] D. Aharonov and M. Ben-Or, Fault-tolerant quantum computation with constant error, STOC ’97: Proc. 29th Ann. ACM
Symp. Th. Comp. , 176.
[77] E. Knill, R. Laflamme, and W. H. Zurek, Resilient quantum
computation: error models and thresholds, Proc. Roy. Soc.
Lond. A 454, 365 (1998).
[78] J. Preskill, Reliable quantum computers, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond.
A 454, 385 (1998).
[79] B. Eastin and E. Knill, Restrictions on transversal encoded
quantum gate sets, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 110502 (2009).
[80] A. Y. Kitaev, Anyons in an exactly solved model and beyond,
Ann. Phys. 321, 2 (2006).
[81] E. Dennis, A. Kitaev, A. Landahl, and J. Preskill, Topological
quantum memory, J. Math. Phys. 43, 4452 (2002).
[82] A. G. Fowler, S. J. Devitt, and C. Jones, Surface code implementation of block code state distillation, Sc. Rep. 3, 1939
(2013).
[83] D. Gottesman, Fault-tolerant quantum computation with constant overhead, Quant. Inf. Comp. 14, 1338 (2013).
[84] J.-P. Tillich and G. Zemor, IEEE Trans. Inf. Th. 60, 1193
(2014).
[85] P. Panteleev and G. Kalachev, Degenerate quantum LDPC
codes with good finite length, performance, Quantum 5, 585
(2021).
[86] N. P. Breuckmann and J. N. Eberhardt, Quantum LDPC codes,
PRX Quantum 2, 040101 (2021).
[87] A. Leverrier and G. Zémor, Quantum Tanner codes, in 2022
IEEE 63rd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
Science (FOCS) (IEEE, 2022) pp. 872–883.
[88] S. Bravyi, A. W. Cross, J. M. Gambetta, D. Maslov, P. Rall,
and T. J. Yoder, High-threshold and low-overhead fault-tolerant
quantum memory, Nature 627, 778 (2024).
[89] A. Cross, Z. He, P. Rall, and T. Yoder, Improved QLDPC
surgery: Logical measurements and bridging codes, (2024),
arXiv:2407.18393.
[90] Q. Xu, H. Zhou, G. Zheng, D. Bluvstein, J. P. B. Ataides, M. D.
Lukin, and L. Jiang, Fast and parallelizable logical computation
with homological product codes, (2024), arXiv:2407.18490.
[91] E. Swaroop, T. Jochym-O’Connor, and T. J. Yoder, Universal adapters between quantum LDPC codes, (2025),
arXiv:2410.03628.
[92] B. W. Reichardt, D. Aasen, R. Chao, A. Chernoguzov, W. van
Dam, J. P. Gaebler, D. Gresh, D. Lucchetti, M. Mills, S. A.
Moses, et al., Demonstration of quantum computation and error
correction with a tesseract code, (2024), arXiv:2409.04628.
[93] N.-C. Chiu, E. C. Trapp, J. Guo, M. H. Abobeih, L. M. Stewart,
S. Hollerith, P. L. Stroganov, M. Kalinowski, A. A. Geim, S. J.
Evered, et al., Continuous operation of a coherent 3,000-qubit
system, Nature , 1 (2025).
[94] L. Caune, L. Skoric, N. S. Blunt, A. Ruban, J. McDaniel,
J. A. Valery, A. D. Patterson, A. V. Gramolin, J. Majaniemi,
K. M. Barnes, T. Bialas, O. Buğdaycı, O. Crawford, G. P.
Gehér, H. Krovi, E. Matekole, C. Topal, S. Poletto, M. Bryant,
K. Snyder, N. I. Gillespie, G. Jones, K. Johar, E. T. Campbell, and A. D. Hill, Demonstrating real-time and low-latency
quantum error correction with superconducting qubits, (2024),
arxiv:2410.05202.
[95] T. Hillmann, L. Berent, A. O. Quintavalle, J. Eisert, R. Wille,
and J. Roffe, Localized statistics decoding: A parallel decoding
algorithm for quantum low-density parity-check codes, Nature
Comm. 16, 8214 (2025).
[96] J. Bausch, A. W. Senior, F. J. Heras, T. Edlich, A. Davies,
M. Newman, C. Jones, K. Satzinger, M. Y. Niu, S. Blackwell,
et al., Learning high-accuracy error decoding for quantum

14
processors, Nature 635, 834 (2024).
[97] V. E. Manucharyan, J. Koch, L. Glazman, and M. Devoret,
Fluxonium: single cooper pair circuit free of charge offsets,
Science 326, 113 (2009).
[98] H. Putterman, K. Noh, C. T. Hann, G. S. MacCabe,
S. Aghaeimeibodi, R. N. Patel, M. Lee, W. M. Jones,
H. Moradinejad, R. Rodriguez, et al., Hardware-efficient quantum error correction via concatenated bosonic qubits, Nature
638, 927 (2025).
[99] U. Réglade, A. Bocquet, R. Gautier, J. Cohen, A. Marquet,
E. Albertinale, N. Pankratova, M. Hallén, F. Rautschke, L.-A.
Sellem, et al., Quantum control of a cat qubit with bit-flip times
exceeding ten seconds, Nature 629, 778 (2024).
[100] K. S. Chou, T. Shemma, H. McCarrick, T.-C. Chien, J. D. Teoh,
P. Winkel, A. Anderson, J. Chen, J. C. Curtis, S. J. de Graaf,
et al., A superconducting dual-rail cavity qubit with erasuredetected logical measurements, Nature Phys. 20, 1454 (2024).
[101] H. Levine, A. Haim, J. S. Hung, N. Alidoust, M. Kalaee, L. DeLorenzo, E. A. Wollack, P. Arrangoiz-Arriola, A. Khalajhedayati, R. Sanil, et al., Demonstrating a long-coherence dual-rail
erasure qubit using tunable transmons, Phys. Rev. X 14, 011051
(2024).
[102] A. Y. Kitaev, Fault-tolerant quantum computation by anyons,
Ann. Phys. 303, 2 (2003).
[103] D. Aasen, M. Aghaee, Z. Alam, M. Andrzejczuk, A. Antipov,
M. Astafev, L. Avilovas, A. Barzegar, B. Bauer, J. Becker,
et al., Roadmap to fault tolerant quantum computation using
topological qubit arrays, (2025), arXiv:2502.12252.
[104] M. Aghaee, Z. Alam, R. Andersen, M. Andrzejczuk, A. Antipov, M. Astafev, L. Avilovas, A. Azizimanesh, B. Bauer,
J. Becker, et al., Distinct lifetimes for X and Z loop measurements in a Majorana tetron device, (2025), arXiv:2507.08795.
[105] A. Montanaro, Quantum algorithms: an overview, npj Quant.
Inf. 2, 15023 (2016).
[106] D. Hangleiter and J. Eisert, Computational advantage of quantum random sampling, Rev. Mod. Phys. 95, 035001 (2023).
[107] F. Arute et al., Quantum supremacy using a programmable
superconducting processor, Nature 574, 505 (2019).
[108] S. Boixo, S. V. Isakov, V. N. Smelyanskiy, R. Babbush, N. Ding,
Z. Jiang, M. J. Bremner, J. M. Martinis, and H. Neven, Characterizing quantum supremacy in near-term devices, Nature Phys.
14, 595 (2018).
[109] Q. Zhu et al., Quantum computational advantage via 60-qubit
24-cycle random circuit sampling, (2021), arXiv:2109.03494.
[110] R. LaRose, A brief history of quantum vs classical computational advantage, (2024), arXiv:2412.14703.
[111] F. Pan, K. Chen, and P. Zhang, Solving the sampling problem
of the Sycamore quantum circuits, Phys. Rev. Lett. 129, 090502
(2022).
[112] M. Cerezo, A. Arrasmith, R. Babbush, S. C. Benjamin, S. Endo,
K. Fujii, J. R. McClean, K. Mitarai, X. Yuan, L. Cincio, and
P. J. Coles, Variational quantum algorithms, Nature Rev. Phys.
3, 625 (2021).
[113] K. Bharti, A. Cervera-Lierta, T. H. Kyaw, A.-L. S. Haug,
T. and, A. Anand, M. Degroote, H. Heimonen, J. S. Kottmann,
T. Menke, et al., Noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ)
algorithms, Rev. Mod. Phys. 94, 015004 (2022).
[114] E. Farhi, J. Goldstone, and S. Gutmann, A quantum approximate optimization algorithm, (2014), arxiv:1411.4028.
[115] J. Biamonte, P. Wittek, N. Pancotti, P. Rebentrost, N. Wiebe,
and S. Lloyd, Quantum machine learning, Nature 549, 195
(2017).
[116] R. Sweke, F. Wilde, J. Meyer, M. Schuld, P. K. Fährmann,
B. Meynard-Piganeau, and J. Eisert, Stochastic gradient descent

for hybrid quantum-classical optimization, Quantum 4, 314
(2020).
[117] J. R. McClean, S. Boixo, V. N. Smelyanskiy, R. Babbush, and
H. Neven, Barren plateaus in quantum neural network training
landscapes, Nature Comm. 9, 4812 (2018).
[118] M. Larocca, S. Thanasilp, S. Wang, K. Sharma, J. Biamonte, P. J. Coles, L. Cincio, J. R. McClean, Z. Holmes, and
M. Cerezo, A review of barren plateaus in variational quantum
computing, (2024), arXiv:2405.00781.
[119] A. Angrisani, A. Schmidhuber, M. S. Rudolph, M. Cerezo,
Z. Holmes, and H.-Y. Huang, Classically estimating observables of noiseless quantum circuits, (2024), arXiv:2409.01706.
[120] R. Sweke, E. Recio-Armengol, S. Jerbi, E. Gil-Fuster, B. Fuller,
J. Eisert, and J. J. Meyer, Potential and limitations of random
Fourier features for dequantizing quantum machine learning,
Quantum 9, 1640 (2025).
[121] F. J. Schreiber, J. Eisert, and J. J. Meyer, Classical surrogates
for quantum learning models, Phys. Rev. Lett. 131, 100803
(2023).
[122] M. S. Rudolph, E. Fontana, Z. Holmes, and L. Cincio, Classical surrogate simulation of quantum systems with LOWESA,
(2023), arxiv:2308.09109.
[123] E. Gil-Fuster, C. Gyurik, A. Pérez-Salinas, and V. Dunjko, On
the relation between trainability and dequantization of variational quantum learning models, (2024), arXiv:2406.07072.
[124] M. Cerezo, M. Larocca, D. García-Martín, N. L. Diaz,
P. Braccia, E. Fontana, M. S. Rudolph, P. Bermejo, A. Ijaz,
S. Thanasilp, E. R. Anschuetz, and Z. Holmes, Does provable
absence of barren plateaus imply classical simulability?, Nature
Comm. 16, 7907 (2025).
[125] E. R. Anschuetz and B. T. Kiani, Beyond barren plateaus: Quantum variational algorithms are swamped with traps, Nature
Comm. 13, 7760 (2022).
[126] D. J. Egger, J. Marecek, and S. Woerner, Warm-starting quantum optimization, Quantum 5, 479 (2021).
[127] R. Tate, J. Moondra, B. Gard, G. Mohler, and S. Gupta, Warmstarted QAOA with custom mixers provably converges and
computationally beats Goemans-Williamson’s MAX-CUT at
low, circuit depths, Quantum 7, 1121 (2023).
[128] H. Mhiri, R. Puig, S. Lerch, M. S. Rudolph, T. Chotibut,
S. Thanasilp, and Z. Holmes, A unifying account of warm
start guarantees for patches of quantum landscapes, (2025),
arXiv:2502.07889.
[129] I. Čepaitė, N. Vaishnav, L. Zhou, and A. Montanaro,
Quantum-enhanced optimization by warm starts, (2025),
arXiv:2508.16309.
[130] F. G. S. L. Brandao, M. Broughton, E. Farhi, S. Gutmann,
and H. Neven, For fixed control parameters the quantum approximate optimization, algorithm’s objective function value
concentrates for typical instances, (2018), arXiv:1812.04170.
[131] V. Akshay, D. Rabinovich, E. Campos, and J. Biamonte, Parameter concentrations in quantum approximate optimization,
Phys. Rev. A 104, L010401 (2021).
[132] A. Montanaro and L. Zhou, Quantum speedups in solving
near-symmetric optimization problems by low-depth QAOA,
(2024), arXiv:2411.04979.
[133] A. B. Catli, S. Simon, and N. Wiebe, Exponentially better
bounds for quantum optimization via dynamical simulation,
(2025), arXiv:2502.04285.
[134] M. Gluza, J. Son, B. H. Tiang, Y. Suzuki, Z. Holmes, and
N. H. Y. Ng, Double-bracket quantum algorithms for quantum
imaginary-time evolution, (2024), arXiv:2412.04554.
[135] A. Abbas, A. Ambainis, B. Augustino, A. Bärtschi,
H. Buhrman, C. Coffrin, G. Cortiana, V. Dunjko, D. J. Eg-

15
ger, B. G. Elmegreen, N. Franco, F. Fratini, B. Fuller, J. Gacon,
C. Gonciulea, S. Gribling, S. Gupta, S. Hadfield, R. Heese,
G. Kircher, T. Kleinert, T. Koch, G. Korpas, S. Lenk, J. Marecek, V. Markov, G. Mazzola, S. Mensa, N. Mohseni, G. Nannicini, C. O’Meara, E. P. Tapia, S. Pokutta, M. Proissl, P. Rebentrost, E. Sahin, B. C. B. Symons, S. Tornow, V. Valls, S. Woerner, M. L. Wolf-Bauwens, J. Yard, S. Yarkoni, D. Zechiel,
S. Zhuk, and C. Zoufal, Challenges and opportunities in quantum optimization, Nature Rev. Phys. 6, 718 (2024).
[136] R. Babbush, J. R. McClean, M. Newman, C. Gidney, S. Boixo,
and H. Neven, Focus beyond quadratic speedups for errorcorrected quantum advantage, PRX Quantum 2, 010103 (2021).
[137] E. Farhi and A. W. Harrow, Quantum supremacy through
the quantum approximate optimization algorithm, (2016),
arXiv:1602.07674.
[138] E. Farhi, D. Gamarnik, and S. Gutmann, The quantum approximate optimization algorithm needs to see the whole graph: A
typical case, (2020), arXiv:2004.09002.
[139] N. Pirnay, V. Ulitzsch, F. Wilde, J. Eisert, and J.-P. Seifert, An
in-principle super-polynomial quantum advantage for approximating combinatorial optimization problems via computational
learning theory, Science Adv. 10, eadj5170 (2024).
[140] M. Szegedy, Quantum advantage for combinatorial optimization problems, simplified, (2022), arXiv:2212.12572.
[141] H. Buhrman, N. Galke, and K. Meichanetzidis, Formal framework for quantum advantage, (2025), arXiv:2510.01953.
[142] A. Gilyén, M. B. Hastings, and U. Vazirani, (Sub)exponential
advantage of adiabatic quantum computation with no sign problem, in Proceedings of the 53rd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing (2021) pp. 1357–1369.
[143] J. Leng, K. Wu, X. Wu, and Y. Zheng, (sub)exponential quantum speedup for optimization, (2025), arxiv:2504.14841.
[144] T. Yamakawa and M. Zhandry, Verifiable quantum advantage
without structure, J. ACM 71, 1 (2024).
[145] S. P. Jordan, N. Shutty, M. Wootters, A. Zalcman, A. Schmidhuber, R. King, S. V. Isakov, and R. Babbush, Optimization by
decoded quantum interferometry, (2024), arxiv:2408.08292.
[146] A. Gu and S. P. Jordan, Algebraic geometry codes and decoded
quantum interferometry, (2025), arXiv:2510.06603.
[147] K. Marwaha, B. Fefferman, A. Gheorghiu, and V. Havlicek,
On the complexity of decoded quantum interferometry, (2025),
arXiv:2509.14443.
[148] E. R. Anschuetz, D. Gamarnik, and J. Z. Lu, Decoded quantum
interferometry requires structure, (2025), arXiv:2509.14509.
[149] G. Carleo, I. Cirac, K. Cranmer, L. Daudet, M. Schuld,
N. Tishby, L. Vogt-Maranto, and L. Zdeborová, Machine learning and the physical sciences, Rev. Mod. Phys. 91, 045002
(2019).
[150] Y. Liu, S. Arunachalam, and K. Temme, A rigorous and robust
quantum speed-up in supervised machine learning, Nature Phys.
17, 1013 (2021).
[151] S. Aaronson, Read the fine print, Nature Phys. 11, 291 (2015).
[152] I. Kerenidis and A. Prakash, Quantum recommendation systems, (2016), arXiv:1603.08675.
[153] E. Tang, A quantum-inspired classical algorithm for recommendation systems, in Proceedings of the 51st annual ACM
SIGACT symposium on theory of computing (2019) pp. 217–
228.
[154] M. Schuld and N. Killoran, Is quantum advantage the right
goal for quantum machine learning?, PRX Quantum 3, 030101
(2022).
[155] R. Sweke, J.-P. Seifert, D. Hangleiter, and J. Eisert, On the
quantum versus classical learnability of discrete distributions,
Quantum 5, 417 (2021).

[156] N. Pirnay, R. Sweke, J. Eisert, and J.-P. Seifert, A superpolynomial quantum-classical separation for density modelling,
Phys. Rev. A 107, 042416 (2023).
[157] R. Molteni, S. C. Marshall, and V. Dunjko, Quantum machine
learning advantages beyond hardness of evaluation, (2025),
arXiv:2504.15964.
[158] J. Liu, M. Liu, J.-P. Liu, Z. Ye, Y. Wang, Y. Alexeev, J. Eisert,
and L. Jiang, Towards provably efficient quantum algorithms
for large-scale machine-learning models, Nature Comm. 15,
434 (2024).
[159] Y. Wang, R. Jiang, Y. Fan, X. Jia, J. Eisert, J. Liu, and J.-P. Liu,
Towards efficient quantum algorithms for diffusion probability
models, (2025), arxiv:2502.14252.
[160] A. W. Harrow, A. Hassidim, and S. Lloyd, Quantum algorithm
for linear systems of equations, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 150502
(2009).
[161] A. M. Childs, R. Kothari, and R. D. Somma, Quantum algorithm for systems of linear equations with exponentially
improved dependence on precision, SIAM J. Comp. 46, 1920
(2017).
[162] A. M. Childs, J.-P. Liu, and A. Ostrander, High-precision quantum algorithms for partial differential equations, Quantum 5,
574 (2021).
[163] J.-P. Liu, H. Ø. Kolden, H. K. Krovi, N. F. Loureiro, K. Trivisa,
and A. M. Childs, Efficient quantum algorithm for dissipative nonlinear differential equations, PNAS 118, e2026805118
(2021).
[164] S. Bravyi, R. Manson-Sawko, M. Zayats, and S. Zhuk, Quantum simulation of a noisy classical nonlinear dynamics, (2025),
arXiv:2507.06198.
[165] P. A. M. Dirac, Quantum mechanics of many-electron systems,
Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 123, 714 (1929).
[166] D. S. Sholl and J. A. Steckel, Density functional theory: A
practical introduction (John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Hoboken,
2009).
[167] H.-Y. Huang, M. Broughton, M. Mohseni, R. Babbush,
S. Boixo, H. Neven, and J. R. McClean, Power of data in
quantum machine learning, Nature Comm. 12, 2631 (2021).
[168] H.-Y. Huang, R. Kueng, G. Torlai, V. V. Albert, and J. Preskill,
Provably efficient machine learning for quantum many-body
problems, Science 377, eabk3333 (2022).
[169] I. M. Georgescu, S. Ashhab, and F. Nori, Quantum simulation,
Rev. Mod. Phys. 86, 153 (2014).
[170] J. I. Cirac and P. Zoller, Goals and opportunities in quantum
simulation, Nature Phys. 8, 264 (2012).
[171] I. Bloch, J. Dalibard, and S. Nascimbene, Quantum simulations
with ultracold quantum gases, Nature Phys. 8, 267 (2012).
[172] R. Blatt and C. F. Roos, Quantum simulations with trapped
ions, Nature Phys. 8, 277 (2012).
[173] C. Monroe, W. C. Campbell, L.-M. Duan, Z.-X. Gong, A. V.
Gorshkov, P. Hess, R. Islam, K. Kim, N. Linke, G. Pagano,
P. Richerme, C. Senko, and N. Y. Yao, Programmable quantum
simulations of spin systems with trapped ions, Rev. Mod. Phys.
93, 25001 (2021).
[174] J. I. Cirac, D. Pérez-García, N. Schuch, and F. Verstraete, Matrix product states and projected entangled pair states: Concepts, symmetries, theorems, Rev. Mod. Phys. 93, 045003
(2021).
[175] G. Carleo and M. Troyer, Solving the quantum many-body problem with artificial neural networks, Science 355, 602 (2017).
[176] K. Gratsea, C. Sun, and P. D. Johnson, Evaluating the efficiency of ground-state-preparation algorithms, Phys. Rev. A
109, 042425 (2024).

16
[177] Z. Ding, Y. Zhan, J. Preskill, and L. Lin, End-to-end efficient
quantum thermal and ground state preparation made simple,
(2025), arxiv:2508.05703.
[178] T. S. Cubitt, Dissipative ground state preparation and the dissipative quantum eigensolver, (2023), arXiv:2303.11962.
[179] Y. Zhan, Z. Ding, J. Huhn, J. Gray, J. Preskill, G. K.-L. Chan,
and L. Lin, Rapid quantum ground state preparation via dissipative dynamics, (2025), arXiv:2503.15827.
[180] S. Lee, J. Lee, H. Zhai, Y. Tong, A. M. Dalzell, A. Kumar,
P. Helms, J. Gray, Z.-H. Cui, W. Liu, et al., Evaluating the
evidence for exponential quantum advantage in ground-state
quantum chemistry, Nature Comm. 14, 1952 (2023).
[181] S. Trotzky, Y.-A. Chen, A. Flesch, I. P. McCulloch, U. Schollwöck, J. Eisert, and I. Bloch, Probing the relaxation towards
equilibrium in an isolated strongly correlated one-dimensional
Bose gas, Nature Phys. 8, 325 (2012), arXiv:1101.2659.
[182] T. Kinoshita, T. Wenger, and S. Weiss, A quantum Newton’s
cradle, Nature 440, 900 (2006).
[183] X. Mi et al., Stable quantum-correlated many body states
through engineered dissipation, Science 383, 1332 (2024).
[184] A. Angrisani, A. Schmidhuber, M. S. Rudolph, M. Cerezo,
Z. Holmes, and H.-Y. Huang, Classically estimating observables of noiseless quantum circuits, (2025), arXiv:2409.01706.
[185] T. Begušić and G. K.-L. Chan, Real-time operator evolution
in two and three dimensions via sparse Pauli dynamics, PRX
Quantum 6, 020302 (2025).
[186] G. Park, J. Gray, and G. K. Chan, Simulating quantum dynamics in two-dimensional lattices with tensor network influence
functional belief propagation, (2025), arXiv:2504.07344.
[187] J. Gray, G. Park, G. Evenbly, N. Pancotti, and G. K. Chan,
Tensor network loop cluster expansions for quantum manybody problems, (2025), arXiv:2510.05647.
[188] A. M. Childs, Y. Su, M. C. Tran, N. Wiebe, and S. Zhu, Theory
of Trotter error with commutator scaling, Phys. Rev. X 11,
011020 (2021).
[189] M. Reiher, N. Wiebe, K. M. Svore, D. Wecker, and M. Troyer,
Elucidating reaction mechanisms on quantum computers,
PNAS 114, 7555 (2017).
[190] G. H. Low and I. L. Chuang, Optimal Hamiltonian simulation
by quantum signal processing, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 010501
(2017).
[191] G. H. Low and I. L. Chuang, Hamiltonian simulation by qubitization, Quantum 3, 163 (2019).
[192] J. Haah, M. B. Hastings, R. Kothari, and G. H. Low, Quantum
algorithm for simulating real time evolution of lattice Hamiltonians, SIAM J. Comp. 52, FOCS18 (2021).
[193] K. G. H. Vollbrecht and J. I. Cirac, Quantum simulators,
continuous-time automata, and translationally invariant systems, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 010501 (2008).
[194] Y. Kim, A. Eddins, S. Anand, K. X. Wei, E. van den Berg,
S. Rosenblatt, H. Nayfeh, Y. Wu, M. Zaletel, K. Temme, and
A. Kandala, Evidence for the utility of quantum computing
before fault tolerance, Nature 618, 500 (2023).
[195] J. Tindall, M. Fishman, E. M. Stoudenmire, and D. Sels, Efficient tensor network simulation of IBM’s Eagle kicked Ising
experiment, PRX Quantum 5, 010308 (2024).
[196] T. Begušić and G. K. Chan, Fast classical simulation of evidence for the utility of quantum computing before fault tolerance, (2023), arXiv:2306.16372.
[197] A. D. King et al., Beyond-classical computation in quantum
simulation, Science 388, 199 (2025).

[198] J. Tindall, A. Mello, M. Fishman, M. Stoudenmire, and D. Sels,
Dynamics of disordered quantum systems with two- and threedimensional tensor networks, (2025), arXiv:2503.05693.
[199] Many-body physics with individually controlled Rydberg
atoms, Nature Phys. 16, 132 (2020).
[200] G. Semeghini, H. Levine, A. Keesling, S. Ebadi, T. T. Wang,
D. Bluvstein, R. Verresen, H. Pichler, M. Kalinowski, R. Samajdar, A. Omran, S. Sachdev, A. Vishwanath, M. Greiner,
V. Vuletic, and M. D. Lukin, Probing topological spin liquids on
a programmable quantum simulator, Science 374, 1242 (2021).
[201] P. Roushan, C. Neill, J. Tangpanitanon, V. Bastidas, A. Megrant,
R. Barends, Y. Chen, Z. Chen, B. Chiaro, A. Dunsworth,
A. Fowler, B. Foxen, M. Giustina, E. Jeffrey, J. Kelly, E. Lucero,
J. Mutus, M. Neeley, C. Quintana, Sank, A. Vainsencher,
J. Wenner, T. White, H. Neven, G. Angelakis, and J. Martinis,
Spectral signatures of many-body localization with interacting
photons, Science 358, 1175 (2017).
[202] W. S. Bakr, Z. Ba, and M. L. Prichard, Microscopy of ultracold
fermions in optical lattices, (2025), arXiv:2507.04042.
[203] R. Jördens, N. Strohmaier, K. Günter, H. Moritz, and
T. Esslinger, A Mott insulator of fermionic atoms in an optical lattice, Nature 455, 204 (2008).
[204] M. Xu, L. H. Kendrick, A. Kale, Y. Gang, C. Feng, S. Zhang,
A. W. Young, and M. G. Martin Lebrat and, A neutral-atom
Hubbard quantum simulator in the cryogenic regime, Nature
642, 909 (2025).
[205] J. Koepsell, J. Vijayan, P. Sompet, F. Grusdt, T. A. Hilker,
E. Demler, G. Salomon, I. Bloch, and C. Gross, Imaging magnetic polarons in the doped Fermi-Hubbard model, Nature 572,
358 (2019).
[206] U. Schneider, L. Hackermueller, J. P. Ronzheimer, S. Will,
S. Braun, T. Best, I. Bloch, E. Demler, S. Mandt, Rasch, and
A. Rosch, Fermionic transport and out-of-equilibrium dynamics in a homogeneous Hubbard model with ultracold atoms,
Nature Phys. 8, 213 (2012).
[207] E. R. Anschuetz, C.-F. Chen, B. T. Kiani, and R. King, Strongly
interacting fermions are nontrivial yet nonglassy, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 135, 030602 (2025).
[208] N. Wiebe, C. Granade, C. Ferrie, and D. G. Cory, Hamiltonian
learning and certification using quantum resources, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 112, 190501 (2014).
[209] D. Hangleiter, I. Roth, J. Fuksa, J. Eisert, and P. Roushan, Precise Hamiltonian identification of a superconducting quantum
processor, Nature Comm. 15, 9595 (2024).
[210] R. Trivedi, A. Franco Rubio, and J. I. Cirac, Quantum advantage and stability to errors in analogue quantum simulators,
Nature Comm. 15, 6507 (2024).
[211] Y. Cai, Y. Tong, and J. Preskill, Stochastic error cancellation in
analog quantum simulation, (2023), arXiv:2311.14818.
[212] J. Rao, J. Eisert, and T. Guaita, Stability of digital and analog
quantum simulations under noise, (2025), arXiv:2510.08467.
[213] D. Camps, E. Rrapaj, K. Klymko, H. Kim, K. Gott, S. Darbha,
J. Balewski, B. Austin, and N. J. Wright, Quantum computing
technology roadmaps and capability assessment for scientific
computing-an analysis of use cases from the nersc workload,
(2025), arXiv:2509.09882.
[214] J. von Neumann, Letter to Lewis L. Strauss (24 October 1945),
in John von Neumann: Selected Letters, Hist. Math., Vol. 27,
edited by M. Rédei (American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2005) pp. 236–239.

